---
layout: default
title: "Why Learn Java?"
parent: "Module 0: Introduction"
nav_order: 1
---

## A Brief History of Java

Java was created by James Gosling and his team at Sun Microsystems in the mid-1990s. The language was designed with the principle of "Write Once, Run Anywhere" (WORA) in mind, meaning that code written in Java could run on any device that has a Java Virtual Machine (JVM). This cross-platform capability, along with its object-oriented features, made Java a popular choice for enterprise applications, web development, and mobile app development. In 2010, Oracle Corporation acquired Sun Microsystems and took over the development of Java.

Over the years, Java has undergone several updates and revisions, with major releases introducing new features and enhancements. The language has a rich ecosystem of libraries and frameworks, making it a versatile tool for developers.

Today, Java remains one of the most widely used programming languages in the world, powering everything from large-scale enterprise systems to Android applications.

## Why Learn Java?

Java is

- Object-Oriented: Java is based on the object-oriented programming paradigm, which helps in organizing complex programs into manageable pieces.
- Big Community: Java has a large and active community, providing extensive resources, tutorials, and forums for developers to seek help and share knowledge.
- Strongly Typed: Java enforces strict type checking, reducing the likelihood of runtime errors and improving code quality.
- Compiled: Unlike JavaScript, Java is a compiled language, which means that code is translated into bytecode that runs on the JVM, improving performance and security.
- Platform-Independent: Java's WORA capability allows developers to write code once and run it anywhere, making it a versatile choice for various applications, for example on Android devices.

## What can you create with Java

- Desktop Applications: Java can be used to create cross-platform desktop applications with graphical user interfaces (GUIs) using libraries like JavaFX or Swing.
- Web Applications: Java is widely used for building robust and scalable web applications using frameworks like Spring and JavaServer Faces (JSF).
- Mobile Applications: Java is the primary language for Android app development, allowing developers to create feature-rich mobile applications.

## What is JVM, JRE & JDK

- JVM (Java Virtual Machine): The JVM is an abstract machine that enables a computer to run Java programs. It converts Java bytecode into machine code, allowing Java applications to be platform-independent.
- JRE (Java Runtime Environment): The JRE is a software package that provides the necessary environment to run Java applications. It includes the JVM, core libraries, and other components required for executing Java programs.
- JDK (Java Development Kit): The JDK is a complete software development kit that includes the JRE, development tools, and libraries for building Java applications. It provides everything needed for Java development, including compilers and debuggers.

## Installing JDK

### Which Version?

As of August 2025 the current version of the JDK is 21. It is recommended to always use the latest stable version for new projects to take advantage of the latest features and improvements.

### How to Install

Note that there are two main distributions of the JDK: Oracle JDK and OpenJDK. Both are widely used, but OpenJDK is the open-source implementation and is

Open JDK can be installed on various operating systems. Here are the general steps:

1. **Download the JDK**: Visit the [OpenJDK website](https://openjdk.java.net/) and download the latest version of the JDK for your operating system.

### Mac Installation (with homebrew)

If you're using a Mac and have Homebrew installed, you can easily install OpenJDK with the following command:

```bash
brew install openjdk
```

After installation, you may need to add the JDK to your `PATH`. You can do this by adding the following line to your shell configuration file (e.g., `.bash_profile`, `.zshrc`):

```bash
export PATH="/usr/local/opt/openjdk/bin:$PATH"
```

Then, run `source ~/.bash_profile` or `source ~/.zshrc` to apply the changes.

To check the installation, you can run the following command:

```bash
java -version
```

This should display the installed version of Java.

### Windows

If you are using Windows, you can install OpenJDK by following these steps:

Visit the [Microsoft OpenJDK download page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/java/openjdk/download) to download the latest version of OpenJDK for Windows.
